I don't think the tape is cute.
I'm sorry.
No, it's a good line.
I was going into L.A.
just on a vacation.
See, actually, we see Dan as a woman who's living with us.
And on Wednesday, and he was in a screening role with David Sontag, who was the head of Fox TV at the time.
And David said to him, I just saw the pilot at NBC, you know, a writer who could write it.
He said, it's about a boy who sails around the world in a sailboat.
Remember that old movie, Dove?
And Dan said, oh yeah, there's a writer arriving in 15 minutes at LAF.
But the reason was I published my first short story out of graduate school in the Atlantic Monthly.
And it was about a family and a sailboat.
So in Hollywood, he was thinking, vote equals vote.
So that was on a Wednesday.
No, let's keep it simple.
So on Friday, Dan took me over to Fox and I met David.
And David said to me, have you ever written a screenplay before?
I said, no.
He said, do you think you can?
I said, yes.
And Dan said, let's go.
And we made a deal.
What did you think you could write a theme?
I mean, it is perfect.
Writing short stories and screen plays.
I'd like some protein.
You know what I love is a blueberry muffin.
They make wonderful blueberry muffins.
Oh, do they?
Sure.
Can they get two?
I mean, they trust me on this.
I trust you.
Muffins and clam chowder, right?
Yeah, I guess.
Why were you so certain that you could write a screenplay?
Because I've gotten through movies so much.
You know, in college I loved Fellini and Truffaut and I thought that making movies was
equivalent to writing a novel.
Because the tape is on, why don't you just go through college, don't even think about it, but why don't you just recycle the college experience?
I went to college at BU, majored in English, then I graduated in 1971, then I went to Stanford Graduate School of Creative Writing.
I was a master's professor.
It is, you don't mind if I jump around.
I find it very interesting and very good to me that you have these wonderful blurbs by three males.
I think I've heard you read every one of them a number of times, but I admire their work, and I don't think that they would give blurbs gratuitously.
Is it helpful for you to get this kind of recognition from the male counterparts in the series, the fact that your publisher is certainly making a big wave up with a woman?
I don't really know how that happens, why the blurbs are for male writers.
They do dominate the field, I guess.
Deeply grateful to have them.
They're completely untouched by me.
They're genuine and very touching.
One writer can extend that to another.
It's very touching.
I know your history and film quality.
Was there disaffection on your part which led to the
It was a combination of factors.
I had been in business with my husband as a lyricist, but we were previous for a while working for Republic Pictures, doing television development.
And everything was going along fine until the writer's strike.
And the writer's strike basically wiped us out.
You know what?
I think it was 88, but don't quote me on that.
I mean, I can tell you if you don't quote me on that.
Yeah, it must have been around 88.
And we had projects in development, and everything was groovy, and then all of a sudden, you're out of work for six months, and your contract was extended for another six months.
The lady would like to try to make her blueberry muffins as well.
Thank you.
So basically, it was a very moralizing experience.
At that point, and the system of trying to sell to television networks was also becoming very wary and very discouraging, even though we were in development and functioning.
And we both made a decision to go back to our creative version, Douglas, his name is Douglas Grayfield, by the way.
B-R-A-Y-F-I-E-L-D.
Douglas went back to poetry and went for his master's degree
So he decided to go for his Master's in Poetry.
It was a non-residency program at Warren Wilson College in North Carolina, and it meant that each of us people wait for two weeks.
It's a wonderful program, by the way.
You work with one poet.
Even at a time as a mentor, it worked on a pretty tight timeline.
Meanwhile, I decided I would write this novel, and we made a lifestyle decision to do it, which meant that we went into our savings over the course of three and a half years, which took me to write a manuscript that I could show to somebody.
I didn't show it to anybody.
I didn't tell anybody what I was doing.
We depleted half of our savings.
And I did it by taking a gig in television for six months, writing a book for six months.
I mean, it was an enormously stressful time.
Fortunately, you had those options open to you.
Yeah, yeah.
Which is good.
Right.
That'll go up.
Do you feel that you're writing, again, your first novel within a different genre?
No, I don't think it's a genre.
In fact, my agent, Molly Friedrich, said,
We have to invent a genre for you.
It's a great book.
It's great.
And she and her, yes.
And she came up with the phrase, literary suspense, which I love.
Tell me what that is.
Well, that's a book that moves forward in a suspenseful way, that keeps the reader hooked, that depends on story, but also is concerned with revelation and insight.
Probably more concerned with revelation and insight than plot.
And yet it wants to be entertaining.
Probably the first thing it wants to be is entertaining for the reader and fun and a good read.
But it has a real heart and soul.
And it has, you know, what we think of as, quote, literary goals, which is to illuminate.
So it tries to do all of that.
Well, and as far as the character, how do you expect to bring the character back?
I think I will, but not in the next book.
Maybe the following book.
And you have created a... I know.
...that happens typically in the business.
I mean, the first one establishes you, and if it takes up, you know, around the fifth or the sixth book, you're an enterprise.
I know, I know.
And maybe you don't want that.
Maybe that goes back to the literary, what was the category again?
Literary suspense.
So maybe you have to continually come up with your characters.
Now, will the next book be of a literary suspense nature?
Yeah, it will.
I can't talk about it.
That's fine.
I know I'm just inventing that, yeah.
No, it will have the same... Do you not have to get the usual standards?
Do you not?
I'm pretty good.
Are they okay?
Uh-huh.
Okay.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
No.
It will move in the same way.
It will have suspense and tension and drama
It'll be a different world and different characters.
So you decided to do the novel.
There was a writer's strike.
And I've read someplace you hold yourself up in an office.
You chose not to work at home.
Good idea.
Yeah.
And then what?
You sit down and you look at the word processor or the typewriter.
Did you have a character?
Was she fully formed?
You know, from the mind of Zeus.
Yeah, well, that would have been good.
No, I started with a story.
I didn't start with a character.
I knew I wanted to tell a story of betrayal.
And in this book, there are many stories of betrayal.
Seeing this is used in a lot of different ways.
And I'm attracted to the story.
That's what turns me on.
That's what I couldn't let go of for three and a half years.
But actually, the main character in the book was not Anna Gray when it started out.
The main character was Clare, and in the late 80s, I wanted to write a story about greed and acquisition in Santa Monica, and about a woman who goes too far.
That was originally what it was.
But Anna Gray took over.
Anna Gray's voice, yeah.
I knew there would be a story about a white woman, upper-class, quote, housewife, and the relationship between her and Hispanic housekeeper.
And in that relationship, I could see conflict and betrayal.
And then I also knew there would be another character who would be the moralizing force, who came in from the outside and, like the detective or like the hero,
creates order out of chaos, you know, and I knew that character would be related to the housekeeper somehow, and thus Anna Graham was born, and I wanted her to be in law enforcement.
And so it was sort of a groping process.
But once I got the outlines for her, once I got her voice, because I knew also, you know, there was another sort of cognitive leap where I realized that that character would tell the story.
I was going to say, you knew that it was going to be narrated, I guess.
Yeah, well, that was another step in the
that that character would be the narrator.
Now that she's the narrator, all of a sudden, now you're on the road to becoming her story more and more and more.
And I did many, many rewrites of the book, turning it and turning it and turning it more and more to Anna's part of me.
Well, it really did go through a number of lives.
And that is a departure from what you've been doing over the last 15 or so years, I mean, to really write with the first person narrating.
The way you write is a screenplay, is it?
No.
A television script.
I gather, I've never written one like that.
So this really was a challenge.
The challenge was to keep it in that point of view and to tell stories.
I mean, if you analyze this book, you can't imagine the number of outlines.
stages and index cards and diagrams, you know, that I went through, to be able to tell the story of these... There were four really main characters, four women characters, to tell all those stories from one person's point of view.
Well, that's... That's just impossible, really.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, there are things that you give up when you choose to marry the novel.
I mean, you can't have a relation...
viewpoint to viewpoint to get into the head.
Did you decide on this present tense kind of structure from the beginning?
You do have verbs in present tense as you were getting off the elevators.
I wasn't really aware of it in the beginning.
You know, I said, well, maybe she's alternating, you know.
But tell me about, you know, the decision.
Yeah, no, I love it.
Yeah, no.
I think it was because I feel first person present tense has a lot of force and immediacy.
Actually, it's similar to movies, in the sense that you're in real time.
The story goes forward in real time, and you're in the present tense.
And I wanted drive.
I felt that would give a drive.
You know, I was again looking at the, going back to the opening chapter.
I said, I'll be damned.
It was done very well because I wasn't aware of it.
Instead of, it started with, you know, it starts with a bank robbery.
It was pure sex.
I said, well, what are we getting into?
Kind of a...
I read the whole first chapter, and I said, well, keep reading.
You knew that this would feature women as a protagonist.
Can you tell me a little bit about female women?
heroes and especially crime detection and prevention.
Of course, you've had experience doing this on television as well.
So I guess you did want to borrow from that experience in the novel.
Or does this reflect a philosophical intention in your character?
That's a soft line.
You can go anywhere you want.
Go anywhere you want.
Okay.
It's challenging for a woman to be in law enforcement.
It still is.
And I did research for Cagney and Lacey by hanging out with New York City cops and talking to female detectives.
And I did research for this book by hanging out to some degree with the FBI, talking to female FBI agents.
I think since I did Cagney and Lacey, which was over ten years ago,
Women have learned how to adapt to the situation in the workplace, both the personal interactions with mainly men, and then the physical challenges of the job and the emotional challenges of the job.
And they walk a very fine line.
It's that, you know, ineffable question of femininity.
How much femininity can you retain?
What's the line between femininity and aggression?
And some of the women in the FBI that I met, I really, really admired because they were very bright and had a sense of humor about themselves and yet had an easy way with the men and didn't make issues out of things that weren't issues.
And it takes the maturity to do that.
There's no whining.
You have to know when to let things slide.
You do.
And I'd say no whining.
It's kind of the credo.
And I admire that.
And it's a challenge for every working woman.
So I think people can identify with it.
Especially in that particular business, which is so historically male.
Yeah.
And in my job, even more than male.
Right.
Persona would be a type of crowd, I guess.
It's a little different in the FBI, which is probably why I felt more comfortable with it, because even though they carry guns and they have to pass physical exams every few months, it's not like being a street cop where you're confronted with physical danger.
So I think the women there might be a little more adaptive to it, not quite as physically challenged, which is the subject of the opening of this book.
You know, Anna confronts physical, what's potentially physical dangerous.
And I take you through it in her mind, how she processes it.
I found it interesting, anyway.
This is coincidental this morning.
I might call them curious in Worcester on a Wednesday.
Everybody else takes them on a weekend.
This is great, because I get a chance to look at it.
There it is.
Great editor over there.
She'll call me with a thing, knowing that, you know, I'm sending it along.
That's good.
Anyway.
Anyway, there's a story on the front page of this female cop from one of the towns who was helping a woman fill out a form to put a restraining order on her husband.
The husband shows up while they're doing this and tax her.
Wow.
And she's going through it and she manages to call in for help.
And another cop comes by.
I mean, it was one of these towns.
It's a page one story.
I don't know.
But she needed the help.
Yeah, I'm sure.
Right.
And she was good.
She was terrific.
Another cop came in 15 o'clock.
I mean, that was really, very scary in this day and age.
You know, she was bitten by anybody.
And there's her picture on the front page.
And that is a decided situation.
And your character faces it in a sequence, you know.
If the person is big and tough and you don't have the courage to shoot him, you might be faking something that you can't handle.
If you deal with that.
Right.
I try to deal with that.
And I think women cuffs, we portray them as handling situations differently from others.
That was something we were looking to portray.
How would, what would the difference be?
And one of them was, well, at least in Lacey's case, she had a big mouth, and she talked a lot, and she would talk her way out of, or talk to somebody, and try to connect with them, rather than just using force.
I know this also, I feel that this is a very visual novel, and I'm sure that having worked in LA has helped you
I just think that you very easily become a movie.
Is that something that's being considered?
Oh, yeah.
Well, I wrote the book to write the book, and the book stands on its own, and I'm proud of it.
And if it becomes a movie, that's fabulous.
But if it becomes a movie, it'll be somebody else's vision, even if I write the screenplay.
It'll be the director's vision.
And so that will be a point which I'll have to cross, but there's a lot of interest in the moment.
You might just talk about that, but I've had humorous writers discuss this in the past.
I mean, the satisfaction of writing a book in a way, I guess, almost incognito.
Nobody knew you were doing the thing, right?
Yeah, right.
And, I mean, when you're talking to a producer or a director, you're thinking that the talent is going to be amazing, but it was just your own little world with your creative.
Right.
And that really must be a pleasant departure for you from what you've been discussing.
That's very true.
It was a pleasure, but once I got over the fear and terror and I got into it, it was exhilarating to write, because you don't know where it's going to lead.
And in screenwriting, you're very constricted, and everything proceeds according to time.
You know, in a television movie, you have seven acts.
Each act has to be a certain amount of minutes long.
And you're building toward commercial breaks, which has nothing to do with the way a story would unfold.
You weren't cognizant of these kinds of constrictions when you were writing?
I mean, the breaks are perfect here.
I don't suggest in any way that they, but I seem to think that you do have this built-in
sense of where something should end.
Yeah.
No, I do.
No, definitely.
But at least I think the story can find its own way to do that.
You're not doing it in terms of minutes and lines.
Right.
And the network's expectation, you know, writing by committee.
Is this a break for you from that professional life?
I mean, it's certainly a departure, but is it a new life?
Are you a novelist now?
I feel like a novelist.
Oh, you are an author.
I feel like an author.
I love that word, author.
Isn't it nice?
I love that word.
I love it better than writer.
I love the word author.
But you have to learn it.
Yes, you do.
You do.
Isn't that right?
Yeah, it is.
Yeah.
It's nuts.
There's a wonderful line in that movie, League of Their Own, and it's about baseball, but I apply it to writing.
It's that for easy, everybody would be talking.
It's not easy.
It's over easy.
Everybody would be doing it.
And I think even more so in writing.
It's not easy at all.
It's impossible.
And it's really impossible to start your first book.
How people do it is beyond me.
And after that, and especially if the book does well, then it's kind of a piece of cake, isn't it?
Yeah.
It is impossible.
It's just impossible.
Tell me a little bit about that, if you might.
I mean, you wrote the book.
Was there any expectations?
I mean, there was hope, certainly.
Yeah, but I really... No commitment, thank you.
No, no.
No agent, even.
No agent.
I felt I was putting everything I had into this book, everything I had, literally, and using all my craft.
And by the way, it also needs to be done.
I couldn't have done it without the total support of my husband, who believes in me and my talents, and also in the story.
And he was my editor, I guess, because he was the only one who I talked to for that length of time.
And then, later on, I did hire a freelance editor before the end, Sandy Gellis Paul, who, when I was ready to show it, she was the first person I showed it to for professional opinion.
Where is she at?
She's out of New York.
She's an acquisitions editor for Doubleday for 15 years, and she was Daniel Steele's editor.
So she's very smart and knows publishing and knows what, you know, what works.
There comes a point where you must show it to people, and the more people you show it to, the better, even though it's scary and painful.
So when I was at that point, I did, I showed it to her, I showed it to Dan.
You know, I showed it to trusted people.
And people with professional size.
Yeah.
Not people who are that bad.
I love it.
No.
It's wonderful.
That is it.
reassuring, and that may be, or it's not a professional appeal.
No.
And you want to be in the book.
Yeah.
And so then you got an agent, and... Well, what happened was I showed it to my agents at CAA, because, you know, they represent me in television.
Again, professional.
And we made a list of New York agents that kept getting small.
You know, we kept winning it down.
And so basically we had two.
They both wanted to represent the book.
So I went to New York and interviewed with both of them.
That was very scary for me, because I felt that was the moment of truth.
They might say they liked the book, but what did that mean, you know?
They agreed to take it, too.
Agreed to take it, but, you know, I'm so accustomed to feedback, and would they take it, but would they want a big rewrite?
You know, would they take it, but think maybe they'll sell it for some small amount of money or whatever?
But I really consciously tried to not have expectations about the sale.
Anyway, I chose Molly Friedrich because she's fabulous and incredibly enthusiastic.
She loved this book.
And I met with her on Thursday.
Told her on Friday I'd go with her.
Went back to L.A.
Gets better.
On Monday, she called me and said, I'm thrilled.
We're going to do this.
I'm sending it out to 15 publishers.
Here's my letter.
She wrote an incredible two-page letter.
And she said, you'll hear in about two weeks.
Tuesday morning, the next day.
Two weeks is fast, too.
Yeah.
Well, the next day, which was Tuesday.
She calls me at 8.30 in the morning, LA time.
It was 11.30 in New York, right?
8.30, 9.30, yeah.
And she said, I have four offers.
Wow.
Overnight?
Overnight.
Literally in less than 24 hours.
Did Sonny make the offer on this?
Well, yeah, sort of.
You're not going to get into technology?
No, no, no.
All right.
What happened was she had given it to the publishers like at 1 o'clock.
I just love this story.
I know it's one of those hopeful things.
She gave them, this book got out like 1 in the afternoon, and people started reading it, and they started to get excited, and they gave it to editors, and literally it's like, I mean, it sounds incredibly narcissistic, but it's true that half of New York publishing was up all night reading my book, including Sonny Mehta.
Somebody got it to him, and he read it that night until 41.
So the next day she had one offer from a publisher that was preemptive.
And she said, this offer is only good for 45 minutes.
You have to decide by 12.15 New York Times.
So my husband was riding his bicycle in Venice.
My kids were running around.
I'm a three-year-old and a nine-year-old.
You know, it's like 8.30 in the morning, and parakeets are flying all over the room.
We've taken the parakeets out.
And I said to Molly, I can't do this now.
She said, you have to, or it's going to evaporate.
So I talked to this one editor who was the head of the publishing house.
Another publishing house or this publishing house?
Yeah, no, another publishing house.
And she was on the phone with another.
And don't use this, okay?
No.
She was on the phone with another editor.
Okay.
So, actually, you turned down the office.
I turned down the office.
Right.
And once I had passed on that.
And one of the reasons, perhaps, was there were certain artistic requirements that were being imposed that you chose were perhaps a bit too restrictive.
Right.
and I thought it would be worth it to take less money in order to write the book that I had labored on for three and a half years.
So, in fact, there was a lot more money being offered than you ultimately accepted from crop?
Well... More money?
Actually, yeah.
It would have worked out to a lot more money.
And is this a hard-soft deal or a hard case?
It's great.
So the paperback is still yours.
Yeah.
Right.
But so when I had passed on the deal, then it was okay, because I wasn't going back and there wasn't any bargaining, you know, we weren't going to clean anybody off together.
And then Molly said, okay, now I can tell you, you also have interest from starting that.
My husband comes back from bicycling.
He's all sweaty.
I'm writing these numbers.
I'm just going crazy.
Crazy.
It was the most exhilarating...
I'm in my pajamas.
I mean, it was me back.
I'm talking to Sonny, and you know, haven't you spoken to Sonny?
Oh, he's fabulous.
But in five minutes, in five minutes, he spoke to the heart of the book, how to make the heart of the book
more accessible and more realized.
And I hung up with him, and I called Molly.
And he is your editor on the book?
I am.
And she said, I'm getting the children of thinking about it.
Well, I'm getting so.
But it's certainly a validation, isn't it, that the time that you spent, it wasn't just filling.
It was recognized by, you know, what many believe is particularly a publisher.
I stick a line up here with .
Oh, yeah.
Well, that's when you talk about genre.
Genre doesn't apply to something, I think.
And that was so attractive to me that he's got my attention.
Did he make that point, by the way?
Yeah, yeah.
Did you talk to him personally, or was it strictly between the agents?
I mean, was there a point where you talked to him directly?
I talked to him directly.
Yeah, when he made the decision to go with him, I talked to him.
Is that wonderful?
And did he need to think that it would be a $200,000 fresh printing?
No, no, not that bad.
who I get on the strength I get of interest from bookstores.
Yeah, that's right.
That decision was not made into this year.
I have no idea what my first plan is going to be.
It's probably going to be small, but if there are people that are interested in it, then they adjust whatever that one is going to be, I guess.
I guess that's how it works.
Yeah.
Are you working now on the next book?
I'm thinking about it.
I'm stuck.
I had two TV scripts I had to finish.
I don't know.
Are they for an ongoing series or at least speculative films?
No, they're movies of the week.
And one of them's for NBC.
They're both originally for NBC.
But we'll be in there.
Of course, television is changing, isn't it?
With all these offers.
Who's making these offers with the networks and the distribution stuff?
But that's all changing.
I've got some very interesting quotes from you about this fundamental change in the whole industry.
You do.
It is almost there.
That's servitude, isn't it?
How the letters are working now, and while there's a lot of money, there isn't really a lot of money for a lot of people.
Development money was dried up.
And if Disney does buy a network and then somebody else buys the other network, I mean, this is all going to be a closed shop, isn't it?
That's right.
It is.
It would be really big weather.
So the creative stuff, that just... So this was really... I mean, this wasn't just something to cast away the other flowers.
No.
No, this was written out of a certain kind of desperation and a certain...
I don't know, defiance, certain anger.
And why Santa Monica?
You mentioned that you knew it would be before you had the character, before you really had to... You knew it was going to be Santa Monica.
You said that earlier, I think.
Why is that?
Why Santa Monica?
Well, I live in Santa Monica.
Oh, I don't know.
Just because I live there, and it was very thrilling.
It was very emotional.
But again, it took a while.
But the North of Montana image is pretty nice.
Yeah.
It is resonant.
It's resonant.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
There's a resonance to it.
And I have to say, you know, when it came in, as we knew, I never felt right about it.
I know.
But that's okay.
That's a nice little adjustment.
That's fine.
It requires you to look at it.
And it's a great cover.
It really doesn't tell you much of anything, you know.
It's just pretty.
It's beautiful.
Mm-hmm.
Well, Chip Kidd did a fabulous job.
You know, I met with Sonny.
Just to finish the story with Sonny in case you're interested.
No, no.
It was sold in whenever it was.
March or April or something.
I didn't meet with him until August.
We met in
in the Bel Air Hotel for like six or eight hours.
He flew directly from London to L.A.
to meet with me, turned around and flew back.
And it was in Georgia.
But anyway, at that point, I said to him, he said, I'm going to start putting the cover into the, you know, cover design into the work.
I said, what's it going to be?
And he said, well,
I'm fairly sure there won't be a gun on the cover.
You know, and that's totally wrong.
Now, have there been reviews yet?
You should ask if you're interested.
I am.
We have a ton of desk.
Okay.
Great.
Especially from PW.
The time's on it yet?
How about the LA Times?
Yeah, Charles Chandler.
Did I get the LA Times?
Yeah, he was very, very nice, very nice.
Because that old Westlake, you know, I seem to be paired with him.
They put you in the Westlake?
I didn't interview you with him, I mentioned.
Honestly, how do you get paired with Westlake?
It doesn't make a lot of sense.
I mean, you both have worked for... I can see, as an editor... Maybe that's enough to justify appearing.
This is not a comic comic novel.
And he had a wonderful quote.
That's not helpful to me, you know, from my point of view.
But anyway, he let off his column.
It was really, really nice.
Well, can I look it up?
Yeah.
I think, am I missing anything, or do you think I'm pretty well covered?
I think you've got the story.
You're going to weigh a thousand words.
Oh, wow, that's a lot.